We are a global campaign, led by <a target="_blank" href="https://www.citizen.org/">Public Citizen</a>, a leader for decades in protecting American consumer rights, which has come together to fight Facebook’s monopolistic abuses. In particular, we are galvanizing around Facebook-owned messaging app WhatsApp’s new privacy policy set to come into effect May 15. When Facebook purchased WhatsApp in 2014, CEO Mark Zuckerberg promised that WhatsApp’s privacy standards would be maintained. “We are absolutely not going to change plans around WhatsApp and the way it uses user data. WhatsApp is going to operate completely autonomously.” This promise has been broken again and again. In 2016, presenting a routine “update” on WhatsAapp’s terms and conditions, Facebook gained access to a range of user data, giving users only 30 days to opt out. Many did not realize they could so in time, while the approximately one billion WhatsApp users who joined after 2016 were given no choice at all. 

Now, yet again, Mark Zuckerberg is breaking the promise he made both to users as well as to the FTC, which okayed the purchase at the time, by, again, “updating” WhatsApp’s privacy policy. This time there is no opt-out option; those who don’t agree will have their accounts deleted. Although this newest policy mostly relates to the privacy of communications between businesses and individuals, it has shed a light on the broken promises made by Facebook when acquiring WhatsApp and highlights the direction Facebook plans to take the app: toward more and more sharing of our data with advertisers.

We believe this campaign has broad interest to the media and general public. First of all, this threat to WhatsApp is particularly onerous for immigrant diasporas, especially Latinos who are the most likely group to use the messenger app. About half of Latinos use the app (or around 32 million), compared to around 16 percent of white Americans. It is their primary means to communicate with their family and friends abroad in Latin America where WhatsApp is used by almost everyone. They cannot simply delete the app without losing vital connections with home.

The story of WhatsApp is also an integral part of the story currently being told about one of today’s most influential corporate behemoths, Facebook, which has come under intense scrutiny in recent years for the existential threat it poses to our democracy, no less. Facebook stands guilty of successive breaches of user privacy, from sharing data with advertisers to granting third-party access to user information as well as market abuses. The company has fallen under ever greater scrutiny since the Cambridge Analytica scandal of 2018. And this scrutiny must continue.

Meanwhile, lawsuits by both the FTC as well as 48 attorney generals are currently being litigated for monopoly abuse, mostly stemming from the company’s purchase of Instagram and WhatsApp. The Guardian has referred to the suit as “the biggest tech battle yet.” It also deserves greater coverage. Facebook has claimed, as part of their defense, that they helped WhatsApp achieve its current market power. Yet it has been revealed through a series of leaked documents that Facebook was in fact worried about WhatsApp’s threat to its own Messenger app, which had had far fewer users, and therefore pursued the purchase to neutralize the threat. It is possible that these suits could lead to Facebook being forced to sell off WhatsApp (as well as Instagram).

Also important to this narrative is the fact that the Biden Administration has been trying to finally give teeth back to the FTC, and has been demonstrating this by appointing strong anti-monopoly advocates like Lina Khan. Facebook proving once again that it will not miss a chance to abuse its monopoly position to extract as much data from us as possible, by relying on the fact that we will soon have nowhere left to go communicate out of their reach, is the perfect illustration of why the Court must take this moment to break up Facebook. Our campaign touches upon many newsworthy items in this moment, exploitation of diaspora communities, Facebook and monopoly abuse, as well as the direction of our new Administration and the scope of its commitment to both consumers and citizens.
